Remove RNQuickCrypto and make RNCrypto the default (#3261)
garden-co/jazz: homepage/homepage/content/docs/upgrade/0-20-0.mdx

import { Alert, CodeGroup } from '@/components/forMdx'

# Jazz 0.20.0 - Full native crypto

With this release, we complete our migration to a pure **native** Rust toolchain.
We have removed the JavaScript compatibility layer, meaning our native Rust core now runs everywhere: React Native, Edge runtimes, all server-side environments, and the web.

## Motivation

Before 0.20.0, Jazz relied on a JavaScript crypto implementation to work around compatibility issues in some runtimes-most notably React Native.
As a result, our native Rust core wasn’t running in React Native and, on some Edge runtimes, 
only worked when WASM was explicitly initialized (see [WASM on Edge runtimes](/docs/react/server-side/setup#wasm-on-edge-runtimes)).

The JavaScript crypto implementation is much slower than native Rust crypto. Although workarounds like RNQuickCrypto for React Native improved performance, they still only wrapped certain native libraries, rather than running Jazz's full Rust crypto.

> With native Rust crypto now running everywhere, Jazz crypto is faster and more reliable. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With native Rust crypto now running everywhere, Jazz comes with good performance in every platform. 
```

> This also helps us speed up the migration of Jazz Core to Rust which will improve the Jazz overall performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also helps us speed up the migration of Jazz Core to Rust which will help us improve the Jazz overall performance.
```

## What changed

- We dropped support for `PureJSCrypto`. Jazz crypto now runs natively in each environment.
- We dropped support for `RNQuickCrypto`. RNCrypto is now the default crypto provider on React Native.
- There is no more fallback to Javascript crypto. If the crypto fails to initialize, it will throw an error. 
**NB**: if you use WASM crypto on Edge runtimes, you need to ensure that WASM is available and initialized. See more details at [WASM on Edge runtimes](/docs/react/server-side/setup#wasm-on-edge-runtimes).

## Breaking changes

### Edge runtimes

If you use WASM crypto on Edge runtimes, you need to ensure that WASM is available and initialized, there is no more fallback to Javascript crypto. 
See more details at [WASM on Edge runtimes](/docs/react/server-side/setup#wasm-on-edge-runtimes).

<CodeGroup>
```ts
import "jazz-tools/load-edge-wasm";
// Other Jazz Imports

export default {
  async fetch(request: Request, env: Env, ctx: ExecutionContext) {
    // Jazz application logic
    return new Response("Hello from Jazz on Cloudflare!");
  },
};
```
</CodeGroup>

if you don't do this, you will get an error like this:

<CodeGroup>
```

> Error: Failed to initialize WasmCrypto. WebAssembly is required for crypto operations on web platforms.

Reviewer: This error should be more informative, either by giving the instructions to fix or by giving the doc page.

The former is preferred so AIs are more likely to fix the issue automatically (thinking about v0)

  "cojson-core-rn": "x.x.x", # same version as jazz-tools
  "jazz-tools": "x.x.x" # same version as cojson-core-rn
}
```
</CodeGroup>

See also: [React Native setup](/docs/react-native/project-setup).

2) **Remove QuickCrypto dependencies/config** (only if you previously added them for `RNQuickCrypto`):

- Remove `react-native-quick-crypto` (and any associated config you added for it).
- Remove any `SODIUM_ENABLED` / `sodiumEnabled` settings you added specifically for QuickCrypto.

3) **Remove `CryptoProvider` entirely** (RNCrypto is now the default)

After installing `cojson-core-rn`, you can remove the `CryptoProvider` option:

<CodeGroup>
```tsx
import { JazzReactNativeProvider } from "jazz-tools/react-native";
import { MyAppAccount } from "./schema";

const apiKey = "you@example.com";

export function MyJazzProvider({ children }: { children: React.ReactNode }) {
  return (
    <JazzReactNativeProvider
      sync={{ peer: `wss://cloud.jazz.tools/?key=${apiKey}` }}
      AccountSchema={MyAppAccount}
    >
      {children}
    </JazzReactNativeProvider>
  );
}
```
</CodeGroup>

If you previously had `CryptoProvider={...}` and/or `import { RNCrypto } ...`, you can remove both:

> 

Reviewer 2: done! Now `CryptoProvider` is not anymore supported in RN and Expo.

  return (
    <JazzReactNativeProvider sync={{ peer: `wss://cloud.jazz.tools/?key=${apiKey}` }}>
      {children}
    </JazzReactNativeProvider>
  );
}
```
</CodeGroup>

4) **If you explicitly used `RNQuickCrypto`, migrate to `RNCrypto`**

If you were using `RNQuickCrypto`:

<CodeGroup>
```tsx
// BEFORE
import { JazzReactNativeProvider } from "jazz-tools/react-native";
import { RNQuickCrypto } from "jazz-tools/react-native-core/crypto";

export function MyJazzProvider({ children }: { children: React.ReactNode }) {
  return (
    <JazzReactNativeProvider
      sync={{ peer: "wss://cloud.jazz.tools/?key=your-api-key" }}
      CryptoProvider={RNQuickCrypto}
    >
      {children}
    </JazzReactNativeProvider>
  );
}

// AFTER (option A: explicit)
import { JazzReactNativeProvider } from "jazz-tools/react-native";
import { RNCrypto } from "jazz-tools/react-native-core/crypto";

export function MyJazzProvider({ children }: { children: React.ReactNode }) {
  return (
    <JazzReactNativeProvider
      sync={{ peer: "wss://cloud.jazz.tools/?key=your-api-key" }}
      CryptoProvider={RNCrypto}
    >
      {children}
    </JazzReactNativeProvider>
  );

> }

Reviewer: This middle step is not required.

We could also merge 4 with 3, as the breaking change is that we don't accept a CryptoProvider anymore.

import { Alert, CodeGroup } from '@/components/forMdx'

# Jazz 0.20.0 - Full native crypto

With this release, we complete our migration to a pure Rust toolchain.
We have removed the JavaScript compatibility layer, meaning our native Rust core now runs everywhere: React Native, Edge runtimes, all server-side environments, and the web.

## Motivation

Before 0.20.0, Jazz relied on a JavaScript crypto implementation to work around compatibility issues in some runtimes—most notably React Native.
As a result, our native Rust core wasn’t running in React Native and, on some Edge runtimes, 
only worked when WASM was explicitly initialized (see: https://jazz.tools/docs/react/server-side/setup#wasm-on-edge-runtimes).

This JavaScript path was also slower than native Rust crypto. Even RNQuickCrypto (a React Native provider) couldn’t match native performance because it only wrapped some native crypto libraries,

>  rather than running Jazz’s full Rust crypto implementation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The JavaScript crypto implementation is much slower than native Rust crypto. Although workarounds like RNQuickCrypto for React Native improved performance, they still only wrapped certain native libraries, rather than running Jazz's full Rust crypto.
```

Wording nit
